---
layout: post
title: 'Book Review: A Mind at Play: How Claude Shannon Invented the Information Age'
type: post
published: true
status: publish
categories:
- Book Review
- Recommended Reading
tags:
- Claude Shannon
- complexity
- information theory
author: Dan Bernier
date: 2017-06-30
---

Review: _A Mind at Play: How Claude Shannon Invented the Information Age,_ by
Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman. Simon & Schuster, July 2017.  Buy a copy from
[Powell's](http://www.powells.com/book/a-mind-at-play-9781476766683/62-0),
[Indiebound](http://www.indiebound.org/book/9781476766683), or
[amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Mind-Play-Shannon-Invented-Information/dp/1476766681/);
see if your friends are reading it at
[goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/32919530-a-mind-at-play).

This June brought a pleasant surprise: my effusive
[review](/2013/12/31/book-review-the-information-by-james-gleick/) of James
Gleick's [_The Information_](http://www.indiebound.org/book/9781400096237)
brought me to the attention of Jimmy Soni, co-author of the new Claude Shannon
biography, _A Mind at Play_. He sent me an early copy of their book, gratis, in
exchange for an honest review. Here it is.

A biography of Claude Shannon, the mathematician and engineer who created
information theory, by two inexperts, but which is enjoyable anyway, because
Shannon was interesting. The authors posit that Shannon's genius grew out of
his playfulness; the presented evidence doesn't quite convince, but is
enjoyable on its own merits.



NYTimes review of The Information:
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/20/books/review/book-review-the-information-by-james-gleick.html


The point of a biography is to illuminate the life of a noteworthy person.
Claude Shannon was most noteworthy for founding information theory, but to
explain his theory to an inexpert audience, it's probably better to skip the
math, and try analogies. But these analogies will be slippery: information,
language, and messages are things most of us understand intuitively and
informally, having learnt them as children, but information theory handles
these notions in specific, novel ways: information is quantified as the
resolution of uncertainty of which symbols constitute the message; meaning and
semantics are ignored, foisted onto the receiver, who has to decide what the
message means.

The analogies are all the more slippery because many of the terms -
_information_, _channel_, _signal_ and _noise_, _bit_ - have osmosed into
common parlance, both losing their specifics, and absorbing associated
meanings.

For a pair of biographers who are by their own admission "not mathematicians or
physicists or engineers" to attempt this could mean trouble, but Soni and
Goodman did a good job.

There are some rough spots. At one point, they say encryption is "a kind of
artificial 'noise'" in the channel; soon after, they explain that Shannon's
theories can protect against all noise, leaving the reader to wonder whether
that includes encryption, whether Shannon defeated cryptography. At another
point, in what can only be a surrender to the temptation of cleverness, while
explaining the stochastic nature of language, they imply that the rules that
govern language restrict our freedom of speech. 

But the broader context of information theory - the existing work that Shannon
built on, and distilled it from, the way it lets us compress messages, and send
them perfectly, without error, over long distances, and the future work it
prepared the way for - all this is explained well.

And luckily, Claude Shannon was also a playful engineer, with a curious
intellect, so there were plenty of entertaining machines to talk about.


_At this point, I'm starting to feel like I should focus more on the OTHER
properties of Shannon they cover: his tinkering, his love of freedom at Bell
Labs, his historical importance, his playfulness, his personal life, his lack
of interest for rewards or fame. And how they tried to show how his playful
intellect made him a genius._



> We are biographers, not mathematicians or physicists or engineers. The best
> we can say for this inexpert book of ours is that we've tried to write as
> we'd like to live. That is, we began with a nagging sense that there is
> something harmful in using without understanding, or at least trying to
> understand. We began with the idea that there is something ungrateful and
> grasping in enjoying our bounty of information without bothering to
> understand how it got here.



But the book is about Shannon, not information theory.






In my review of _The Information_, I said "I was aware of information theory, a
little, but not very clear what it was all about, or for." Looking back, my
review didn't demonstrate that I learned a whole lot from Gleick, but I did -
though, not using information theory every day, some of the specifics have
faded.

And, fundamentally, information theory is behind _so much_ of modern life. It's
why long-distance phone calls work, why Voyager can send images back to Earth,
why the internet and mobile phones work, why we can stream movies and music to
our phones. Its sibling field, cryptography, in which Shannon also did
important work, is why we can safely buy stuff online, and is our protection
against both identity thieves and snooping governments. There's a wonderful
Arthur Koestler quote cloistered in the Acknowledgements:

> Modern man lives isolated in his artificial environment, not because the
> artificial is evil as such, but because of his lack of comprehension of the
> forces which make it work -- of the principles which relate his gadgets to
> the forces of nature, to the universal order. It is not central heating which
> makes his existence "unnatural," but his refusal to take an interest in the
> principles behind it. By being entirely dependent on science, yet closing his
> mind to it, he leads the life of an urban barbarian.

Software is [eating the
world](https://duckduckgo.com/?t=lm&q=software+is+eating+the+world), so
information theory is an important part of not being an urban barbarian.



Anyway, the point is, this book isn't the place to go to learn information
theory. _The Information_ is a solid resource for lay-people, and though I
still honestly haven't read it, Shannon's "A Mathematical Theory of
Communication" is said to be very readable. Even though I'm fuzzy on some of
the specifics of information theory, some of the analogies employed to explain
it seemed misleading, or at least muddling, in a way that I often see when
non-technical people try to explain technical subjects to other non-technical
people. But this isn't a book to learn information theory from.

The book puts Shannon into context, from his youth in Gaylord, Michigan,
through university, doing cryptography work during World War II, his rise to
fame at Bell Labs, his professorship at MIT, and his retirement. It puts him in
context with his contemporaries: his mentor Vannevar Bush, his predecessors
Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley, his peer Norbert Wiener, and his successors,
including David Huffman, Abraham Lempel, and Jacob Ziv.

Fans of Norbert Wiener, Shannon's contemporary, and the Liebniz to Shannon's
Newton, may feel that Wiener receives not enough attention here. (I say that
only having read some articles about Wiener online; I haven't studied
cybernetics, or Wiener's history.)

One aspect of Shannon I appreciated was his engineering side, his practicality,
his workmanship.


"I think the history of science has shown that valuable consequences often
proliferate from simple curiosity." - Claude Shannon




The book was a wonderful introduction to the quiet man with a playful
intellect. The main thrust of the book is that Shannon was uninterested in
accolades, awards, or remuneration, though he got plenty of each.

The book's thesis is that Shannon was a genius, partly because he had such a
playful intellect. ...Shannon's playful intellect led to his genius.
...Shannon's genius grew out of his playfulness. The evidence: he pursued
problems for their interest, not for their practicality, or for fame or money;
...he pursued problems that were interesting, no matter if they were impactful;
he juggled and unicycled; he invented crazy contraptions like a flame-shooting
trumpet, an actual juggling robot, 


There are a few threads woven through the book: the chronology of Shannon's
life, his playfulness, his work on information theory, his tinkering, his lack
of interest in fame or fortune. While these threads never quite cohere into a
theory of Shannon's genius, we do get a close look at a fascinating intellect,
and delightful personality. This is all the more pleasant, and the more
remarkable, because Shannon was apparently fairly reserved.








It didn't come up in the book, but a colleague pointed me to an apparently
well-known, and delightful, [painting of Claude
Shannon](https://ergodicity.net/2016/04/19/jan-hein-van-dierendoncks-painting-of-shannon/)
by Jan Hein van Dierendonck.





I want to mention his "Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits"
paper, and humble-brag about how it's an insight that I, too, have had, but I
should probably read the paper first.













--------------------

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/2017/07/shannon-books.png)

Let's try again.


"I think the history of science has shown that valuable consequences often
proliferate from simple curiosity." - Claude Shannon

_A Mind at Play_ 


the subtitle: "How Claude Shannon Invented the Information Age"




Claude Shannon was a celebrated mathematician and engineer, and the founder of
information theory, which you can say without fear of overstatement is the
underpinning of almost everything digital in this digital age. All those bits,
those zeros and ones, that we endlessly send around? Shannon gave us the theory
to send them securely, efficiently, and without error.

As noteworthy as that is, and as decent a job as Soni and Goodman do of
explaining information theory for a lay audience, if you want to understand
information theory, just read Gleick's _The Information_, or go to the source
and read Shannon's _The Mathematical Theory of Communication_. 

This book is about Shannon: his life and times, his personality, his passions.
...how he followed passions of math and blah blah through the war and Bell
Labs, into a comfortable professorship at MIT and celebrity status.

Briefly: Shannon was born in Michigan in 1916. He graduated from University of
Michigan in 1932 with a BS in engineering and another in math. At MIT, he
published [a
thesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Symbolic_Analysis_of_Relay_and_Switching_Circuits)
showing that telephone relays and circuits embody Boolean algebra, giving us
both a proven way to simplify circuits, and a mechanical way to calculate
Boolean expressions, paving the way for digital circuits. After a short time at
Princeton, he joined Bell Labs to work on wartime research, including [fire-control systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fire-control_system) to aim guns, but also cryptography, which permitted him to meet Alan Turning.
After the war, in 1948, he published _A Mathematical Theory of Communication_
in an AT&T periodical, which founded the field of information theory, and was
soon republished with explanatory material by Warren Weaver as _The
Mathematical Theory of Communication._ In 1956, he went to teach at MIT.

From early on, Shannon was interested in juggling, unicycling, and chess, and
he was a tinkerer who made machines to develop and refine an idea. But after
founding information theory, the freedom afforded him by both Bell Labs and MIT
(the director of Bell Labs' Mathematics Division said Shannon "had earned the
right to be non-productive", p 199) permitted Shannon's curiosity to flourish.
He built a chess-solver; a mechanical "mouse" that could brute-force solve a
maze, but remember the solution; the first wearable computer, for cheating at
Roulette; a juggling machine; a calculator that processed Roman numerals; a
Rubik's cube solving machine; and a flame-throwing trumpet.

The authors seem to suggest that Shannon's zany impracticality is evidence of
his genius: who else would build a juggling machine?



This playful-Einstein commonplace only serves to distance us from Shannon, to
make him seem more unknowable. Where the authors see surprising contradictions...
There are whiffs of hagiography, and wonder and amazement that Shannon could be
both playful AND serious, both a theorist AND a tinkerer.

Shannon loved ideas, and problems.

The authors seem amazed that Shannon could be both playful AND serious, both a
theorist AND a tinkerer, a creative AND a mathematician. That these dichotomies
should be so surprising strikes me as outdated.

There's a bit on pp 71-72 that starts to get fuzzy about Shannon, and his
work's applicability.

Page 202 has a pretty fair treatment of what I think is really going on: 

"The design of game-playing machines may seem at first an entertaining pastime
rather than a serious scientific study [but there is] a serious side and
significant purpose to such work..." (p 207)

"Although perhaps of no practical importance, the question is of theoretical
interest, and it is hoped that a satisfactory solution of this problem will act
as a wedge in attacking other problems of a similar nature and of greater
significance." (p 212)

The word "genius" is thrown around a lot.



The authors gather together a bunch of pieces of Shannon, and try to show that
his playfulness is where his genius came from, that his genius is due to his
playfulness. I think they make too much of 

Discovering and refining ideas is a form of play. Alan Kay said something
similar, when he [said](http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=1039523) "All
creativity is an extended form of a joke." Sometimes ideas are useful, or
impactful, or valuable, but that doesn't mean the people who found them are
pursuing utility, or impact, or value.

The book gathers a number of threads, but they never quite cohere. Its title
suggests the main conceit of the book: that Shannon was a genius, because of
his playful intellect.

_see the end of the introduction for some good grist_

It would be nice to extract some lesson from Shannon's life, to understand why
he was brilliant, and maybe to find some insights to apply, and to benefit
from. Soni and Goodman indulge this at times, particularly in the last
chapter, and these are the worst parts of the book. As the authors admit, they
"are biographers, not mathematicians or physicists or engineers"; maybe their
instincts would be better

What the book does very well, is to gather together those pieces of Shannon.
The book is a warm introduction to a playful, humble intellect, and a view into
an important period of history. Shannon was often compared to Einstein, and
some of his supporters thought that comparison was unfair - to Einstein; for
all of that, Shannon seems to have worn it lightly. The authors tell how an
elderly Shannon attended an information theory conference, and when he finally
took the stage, the applause went on so long, he, at a loss, started to juggle.
It's like when Feynman was introduced before giving a lecture, and the
introducer mentioned that Feynman played the bongos; Feynman started his
lecture by noting that "on the infrequent occasions when I have been called
upon in a formal place to play the bongo drums, the introducer never seems to
find it necessary to mention that I also do theoretical physics. I believe that
is probably because we respect the arts more than the sciences."
